Step 1
Identify all laboratory services during the treatment period. The valid procedure and revenue codes for these services are listed in Table SPT-LAB.
Step 2
Identify codes to price. CPT procedure codes are the preferred codes for pricing laboratory services. If a CPT code is present for a service, price the service using the available CPT code and procedure modifier (if applicable) using Table SPT-LAB. If a CPT code is not present for a service, price the service using the available revenue code. 
Identify modifier codes when a CPT code is present. Procedure modifiers are sometimes used to define a service in more detail. In Table SPT-LAB, the standard price for the same CPT code can include multiple rows, reflecting the combinations of CPT codes and modifiers. 
For laboratory services, Table SPT-Lab recognizes the following applicable modifiers:
•	26 = Professional Component.
•	TC = Technical Component.
If a laboratory service is billed with a blank modifier, match the procedure code and blank modifier on the service to the appropriate row in Table SPT-LAB. 
If a laboratory service is billed with an applicable modifier, match the procedure code and modifier on the service to the appropriate row in Table SPT-LAB. 
If a laboratory service is billed with a no applicable modifier, set the procedure modifier to blank and match the procedure code and blank modifier on the service to the appropriate row in Table SPT-LAB. 
If the procedure code has no modifiers or if all modifiers for a specific procedure code are not applicable, price the procedure code with a blank modifier.
Refer to the “Example” table in Calculating Total Standard Cost: Surgery and Procedure. 
If the same service is billed by multiple providers, include and price all services. For example, if a physician and a facility bill for the same service, price both.
Step 3
Download Table SPT-LAB from the NCQA Web site (www.ncqa.org).
Step 4
Match each applicable procedure and applicable procedure modifier or revenue code to obtain the assigned standard price for the service.
Step 5
Multiply the standard price by the number of units associated with the service. Most services have one unit.
Step 6
Sum the standard prices across the laboratory services to calculate total cost.
